5.2 Evidence of structural transformation in AfricaThe analytical framework and empirical tools from the Atlas of Economic Complexity are used in this section first to examine the extent to which African countries have undergone structural transformation and then to draw on the intuition of this framework to understand the process of structural transformation. The shift to manufacturing activities is a key element of structural transformation. A better understanding of this process may thus offer insights into the drivers behind African manufacturing performance.
5.2.1 The notion of economic complexityHausmann et al. (2011) argue that the process of economic development involves the accumulation of capabilities or productive knowledge that allow a country to produce a diversity of increasingly complex products. Hidalgo, Hausmann and Dasgupta (2009) describe these productive capabilities as non-tradable networks of collective know-how, such as logistics networks, finance networks, supply networks and knowledge networks. The notion of a country acquiring productive capabilities is encapsulated in the measure of 'economic complexity' developed by Hidalgo, Hausmann and Dasgupta (ibid.) and further discussed by Hausmann et al. (2011) in the Atlas of Economic Complexity.The intuition behind this idea is described by Hausmann et al. (ibid.) using the game of Scrabble as an analogy. Each player is a country, each word that a player builds is a product and each letter from the alphabet represents a capability needed to produce a word (product). If a player (country) has many letters (capabilities), then she or he (it) can make more words (products). Hence, the diversity of the words (products) that a player (country) can make depends on the number of letters (capabilities) that she or he (it) has. The number of players (countries) that can make a word (product) provides information on the variety of letters (capabilities) needed to make a word (product). Long words (complex products) tend to be less ubiquitous since only a few players (countries) have the requisite letters (capabilities) needed to assemble them. Shorter words (less complex products) tend to be more ubiquitous since more players (countries) are likely to have the requisite letters (capabilities) needed to assemble them.The measure of economic complexity developed by Hidalgo, Hausmann and Dasgupta (2009) corresponds to estimating the fraction of the alphabet a player possesses (a country’s capabilities), using information on how many words a player can make (the number of products a country can produce) and determining how many other players can make those same words (how many other countries can produce those products). In this light, the process of economic development involves the accumulation of capabilities that allow a country to produce a greater diversity of increasingly complex products.Hidalgo, Hausmann and Dasgupta (2009) exploit the bipartite network structure of trade, where countries are connected to the products they produce, in order to quantify the complexity of a country’s economy. A country’s measure of economic complexity is based on two components: the diversity of its export structure; the ubiquity of the products that it exports. The combination of these two measures and the use of an iterative calculation procedure, the Method of Reflections, generate quantitative measures of complexity. These two measures of complexity are the Economic Complexity Index (ECI) and the Product Complexity Index (PCI). The ECI is a measure of the productive capabilities specific to each country and the PCI is a measure of the productive capabilities required to produce each product.4 Box 5.1 presents a technical explanation on the measurement of economic complexity.


5.2.2 Economic complexity and manufacturing in AfricaEconomic complexity, as measured in the ECI, is closely linked to a country’s level of development and its future economic growth (Hausmann et al., 2011). In this light, it is interesting to consider the ranking of African countries relative to other countries, depicted in figure 5.1, showing the relationship between the log of GDP per capita and economic complexity across a sample of low-, middle- and high-income countries. As in Hausmann et al. (ibid.), a positive relationship between a country’s productive capabilities and its level of economic development is evident, further emphasised by the grouping of countries according to level of economic development.However, of more interest is the positioning of African countries – identified by the red markers. The clustering of red markers in the south-west corner of figure 5.1 indicates that African economies are associated with lower levels of economic complexity, and thus, lower levels of economic development. It is worth noting that the African context is heterogeneous. With the exception of Tunisia, all African countries are associated with low levels of economic complexity (figure 5.1).To analyse the African context further, especially in relation to manufacturing, the relationship between economic complexity and the number of manufactured products a country exports in 2013 is examined. This relationship is depicted in figure 5.2, which shows that higher levels of economic complexity are associated with export structures characterised by a greater diversity of manufactured products. In figure 5.2, a number of points are worth mentioning. First, African countries that are ‘substantial exporters’ of manufactured products, such as South Africa (ZAF), Tunisia (TUN), Morocco (MAR) and Egypt (EGY), tend to have higher levels of economic complexity. Second, there is a group of African countries – Mauritius (MUS), Côte d’Ivoire (CIV), Kenya (KEN), Uganda (UGA) and Zambia (ZMB)5 – that have relatively high levels of economic complexity and substantial manufacturing sectors in relation to their African peers. It could be argued that these ‘manufacturing frontier economies’ have the potential to emerge as regional manufacturing hubs. Third, in relation to top-performing emerging market countries, such as China (CHN), Mexico (MEX), Malaysia (MYS), Turkey (TUR), Thailand (THA), Brazil (BRA) and India (IND), Africa’s top manufacturing exporters have lower levels of economic complexity, and hence lower levels of productive capabilities.
Nevertheless, despite some heterogeneity, the relatively low levels of economic complexity across African countries imply low levels of productive capabilities. This has implications for the ability of these economies to acquire more productive capabilities and shift to more complex manufacturing activities. This is explored using another analytical tool contained within the Atlas of Economic Complexity, the 'product space' analysis developed by Hausmann and Klinger (2006) and Hidalgo et al. (2007).5.2.3 Considering the product spaceStandard neoclassical trade theory suggests that a country’s productive structure, or pattern of specialization, is determined by the underlying characteristics of the country, such as factor endowments and technology. Changes to the productive structure are driven by accumulation of these underlying characteristics. For example, the Rybczynski theorem, derived from the Heckscher-Ohlin model, states that the accumulation of a factor endowment, such as capital, results in a shift in production toward more capital-intensive products. These models have little to say about whether shifts in a country’s productive structure are influenced by its current productive structure. However, Hausmann and Klinger (2006) and Hidalgo et al. (2007) argue, using the product space analytical framework, that a country’s current productive structure affects its future productive structure. Hence, the process of structural transformation is path-dependent.The intuition behind the product space framework is explained by Hausmann et al. (2011) using the ‘chicken and egg’ problem. The accumulation of productive capabilities, which is associated with higher levels of economic development, is simultaneously aligned with the development of new industries that use this knowledge. If there is no demand for the new industry, then there is no incentive to accumulate the requisite productive capabilities. However, without the requisite productive capabilities, it is impossible to develop the new industry. Therefore, as Hausmann et al. (ibid.) argue, countries tend to move from products that they are currently producing to ‘nearby’ products. ‘Nearby’ products refer to products for which the required productive capabilities are similar to the productive capabilities embodied in the country’s current productive structure. Thus, it is easier to shift from shirts to jackets than from shirts to catalytic converters. This suggests, crucially and of particular relevance to the African context, that the process of structural transformation is path-dependent.Hausmann and Klinger (2006) investigated the hypothesis that countries diversify by moving into products that require similar productive capabilities to products that they already produce, and formulated the product space framework. The product space is a graphical depiction of the distance between products, where the distance is a measure of the difference in productive capabilities required to produce them.6 Products that are closer to one another require similar productive capabilities; it is thus easier for countries to move to nearby products. The distances and connections between products generate the structure of the product space. Further detail on analysing a product space graph is provided in box 5.2.An important aspect of the 'product space' is the presence of a core and periphery. The core is comprised of relatively more proximate and connected products, typically manufactured products, while the periphery is comprised of relatively less proximate and connected products, typically primary products. This has implications for the process of structural transformation and the ability to shift to more complex manufactured products. If a country’s productive structure is represented by a number of products within the core of the product space, then its ability to diversify into new products is made easier because there are many ‘nearby’ products that require productive capabilities similar to those it currently possesses. Conversely, if a country’s productive structure is more peripheral, then its ability to diversify into products in the core of the 'product space' – typically manufacturing products – is limited because its productive capabilities are ‘far’ from those it requires to diversify.
5.2.4 The product space and manufacturing in AfricaUsing the product space tool on the Atlas of Economic Complexity website, it was possible to analyse the product spaces for a variety of African countries. For the purpose of brevity, figure 5.3 presents the product spaces for two African countries, Uganda and Ghana. These two countries represent two groups of African countries that vary with respect to the strength of their manufacturing sectors.7Ghana represents the aggregate African product space, which is emblematic of a weak manufacturing sector that is evident in a large number of African countries. The productive structure of these African countries tends to be, on aggregate, peripheral. Further observation shows that this has not changed much over the period 1995-2013. These peripheral products are predominantly primary products (e.g. the large nodes for Ghana are gold, cocoa beans and petroleum), which provide insight into the overall levels of economic complexity, and hence productive capabilities inherent in Ghana (and the bulk share of African economies). Primary products are associated with lower levels of product complexity, which translates into lower levels of economic complexity, as evident in figure 5.2. Relatedly, the peripheral character of their productive structures is matched by the paucity of manufactured products (i.e., very few occupied nodes in the core of the product space).The peripheral nature of the productive structures of the aggregate African product space (represented by Ghana) has implications for structural transformation. Primary products found in the periphery of the product space are relatively distant from manufactured products found in the core of the product space. Intuitively, this indicates that the productive capabilities embodied in the production of relatively less complex primary products is distant from those capabilities required to produce manufactured products in the core of the product space. As such, the peripheral nature of the productive structures of this group of African economies suggests that it is difficult to diversify into new products, particularly relatively distant manufactured products.Although one could argue that the ‘aggregate African’ productive structure is peripheral, there is evidence of heterogeneity across African economies. For instance, the product space for Uganda, depicted in the bottom panel of figure 5.3, represents a ‘manufacturing frontier economy’. Uganda is emblematic of a small number of African economies, such as Kenya, South Africa, Mauritius, Morocco, Tunisia and Egypt, with existent and emerging manufacturing sectors. In these economies, the number of occupied nodes within the core of the product space is higher.Uganda provides an interesting example of how a country’s existing productive structure influences its future productive structure. Figure 5.4 focuses on a section in the core of Uganda’s product space and shows how its productive structure has evolved over the period 2005 to 2013. The nodes with the dashed circles represent products exported in 2005, with the yellow and red dashes representing continuing and dying products, respectively. The white lines show the products that are connected to the manufactured product of interest, HS1905 ‘Baked goods’.In 2005, Uganda produced three products within this section of the core of its product space. Subsequently, in 2013 Uganda diversified to 12 other manufactured products, which are linked to HS1905 ‘Baked goods’, the product it exported in 2005. This is a clear depiction of how countries diversify to ‘nearby’ products. The productive capabilities associated with ‘Baked goods’ was close enough to the productive capabilities required by these 12 nearby manufactured products. Thus, Uganda was able to diversify into a greater number of manufactured products. The implication of this pattern of diversification is that once a country accumulates the productive capabilities needed to produce a ‘connected’ product in the core of the product space, the path for subsequent diversification is much clearer.The product space framework provides both a visual depiction of the connectedness of a country’s export structure and a measure of this connectedness. Hausmann et al. (2011) provide a measure that captures the value of the new productive opportunities or connectedness associated with a country’s current export structure, namely, the opportunity value index (see box 5.3). When the product is located in the highly connected core of the product space (associated with a higher opportunity value index), the process of shifting into new products and growing the complexity of an economy is relatively easier. Intuitively, this indicates that the productive capabilities implied by a country’s current productive structure is relatively close to the productive capabilities required to shift production into new products. Conversely, being located in the less connected periphery (associated with a lower opportunity value) makes it relatively more difficult to shift into new products and increase the complexity of an economy. This indicates that the productive capabilities implied by a country’s current productive structure are relatively distant from the productive capabilities required to shift production into new products.Figure 5.5 depicts the relationship between a country’s opportunity value and economic complexity indices. It is evident that higher levels of economic complexity are associated with increased connectedness and greater potential for diversification, and hence structural transformation. However, further interrogation of this link between opportunity value and economic complexity suggests some nuance. Countries at lower levels of economic complexity, mainly African countries, have relatively disconnected productive structures. Their ability to diversify and undergo structural transformation is thus constrained. In essence, this suggests that these countries do not possess the productive capabilities needed to shift their production structure to more complex manufactured products. The peripheral nature of their product space does not afford them opportunities to diversify and grow in complexity. Second, in the case of some high-income OECD countries (blue markers), which already occupy large portions of the product space, opportunities for further diversification are low. Third, countries with intermediate levels of economic complexity exhibit varying levels of connectedness and thus exhibit varying levels of potential for further diversification.Figure 5.5 does suggest a non-linear link between an economy’s ability to diversify, and hence, undergo structural transformation and its level of economic complexity. To explore this further, the relationship between the connectedness of a country’s export structure in an initial period, 1995, and the number of pure manufacturing products it exports in 2013 is examined. This relationship is examined across levels of development, which is already known to align closely to economic complexity, as depicted in figure 5.6. The key notion behind this analysis is to determine whether a country’s initial export structure and the productive capabilities and connectedness associated with it has an impact on its ability to undergo structural transformation, particularly a shift toward more complex manufactured products.From the African perspective, figure 5.6 offers some interesting insights. First, for low-income (predominantly African) economies, there is no correlation between the connectedness of their export structure in 1995 and the number of pure manufactured products that they produced in 2013. This suggests that the peripheral nature of their initial productive structure offers little opportunity for diversification into manufactured products.However, in the middle-income country case, it is evident that a positive correlation exists between the connectedness of their export structure in 1995 and the number of pure manufactured products that they produced in 2013. This suggests that the initial export structures of these relatively more complex economies, some of which are African, allowed for subsequent diversification into manufactured products.The low- and middle-income country cases in figure 5.6 suggest that a non-linear relationship exists between a country’s opportunity value in an initial period, 1995, and the number of pure manufactured products it exports in a later period. One could argue that this suggests that the productive capabilities that embody the export portfolios of these low-income countries are distant from the productive capabilities required to produce more complex manufactured products in a later period. However, in the middle-income country case, it seems that an opportunity value threshold has been reached in terms of productive capabilities. Thus, the shift into more complex manufactured products is relatively easier. As such, the process of structural transformation - shifting to more complex manufactured products - is hindered by a country’s existing productive capabilities.Here, the link between a country’s opportunity value index and its manufacturing performance, specifically in the African context, is investigated. Figure 5.7 shows how the growth in pure manufacturing over the 1995-2013 period across a sample of African countries is related to the opportunity value of these countries in 1995. It suggests a positive relationship, but with a number of qualifications. Countries with better-connected export portfolios in 1995 tended to experience greater entry into new pure manufacturing export markets (e.g. Tunisia, Egypt, United Republic of Tanzania, Madagascar and Mauritius). However, it is also evident that some countries with high opportunity value indices have underperformed, in particular, South Africa and Zimbabwe. This suggests that other factors (for example, political or policy related factors) may influence a country’s pattern of structural transformation, despite what its initial export structure offers in terms of potential.The Atlas of Economic Complexity toolkit and framework developed by Hausmann et al. (2011) and the analysis above suggest that the initial productive structure of an economy, and hence its initial level of productive capabilities have an impact on the number of manufactured products it produces and exports in later periods. This suggests that the process of structural transformation is a path-dependent process. The export structures of African economies, and hence what the Atlas variables reveal about the structure of these economies, points to their being characterised by low levels of economic complexity. The productive capabilities in these economies are limited and basic. The ‘peripheral’ nature of the product spaces of many African economies implies that the productive capabilities embodied in the export structures of these economies is distant from the productive capabilities required to shift to more complex manufactured products.However, it is also evident that the African context is heterogeneous and that a number of African countries have experienced growth in manufacturing over the past two decades. The analysis suggests that these African economies – for example, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, Madagascar, Mauritius, Tunisia and Egypt – had productive structures that embodied a sufficient level of productive capabilities to allow for a transition into more complex manufactured products. It also examines the extent to which the economic complexity and opportunity value indices explain variation in manufacturing performance across a sample of developed and developing countries, some of which are African. These indices make it possible to examine whether the productive capabilities of a country, for example, institutions, infrastructure and the business environment, explain its manufacturing performance.