5.3 Methodology and data descriptionThis section outlines the econometric approach and details regarding the specifications estimated in Section 4. The various data used in the regression estimations are also described.8
5.3.1 Econometric approachTo examine the factors that may be constraining the performance of manufacturing in Africa, the following econometric approach is employed. First, standard neoclassical variables will be analysed to determine whether they explain variation in manufacturing performance across a sample of both African and non-African countries over time. In this first set of specifications, country factor endowments that would feature in a standard production function are controlled for, such as capital per worker, technology and natural resource abundance.Second, the analysis in Section 2 shows that countries with higher levels of economic complexity, and hence more productive capabilities, are more likely to have established manufacturing sectors. Furthermore, a country’s ability to diversify into more complex manufactured products is greater the closer its current set of productive capabilities (embodied in its current production structure) are to those needed to produce these products. In the second set of specifications, the economic complexity and opportunity value indices developed by Hausmann et al. (2011) are included to control for the productive capabilities of a country.Third, to tease out the African effect, a dummy variable controlling for African countries in the regressions was included. The initial estimations focused on a sample of African countries. The fixed effects estimator was used to examine the determinants of manufacturing performance. However, the initial estimations were problematic for two reasons: the data across African countries and over time resulted in a very small sample; and manufacturing performance across African countries tends to be at the bottom of the cross-country distribution. Thus, it seems that there is too little variation to work with in such a small sample. Therefore, to build a larger sample, non-African countries were included. Furthermore, to tease out the African effect, the African dummy variable was included and the random effects estimator employed; its cost is the inability to employ the fixed effects estimator and control for country and time fixed effects.Finally, it is determined whether there is a non-linear relationship between a country’s opportunity value index and its manufacturing performance. This is motivated by initial evidence in figure 5.6, which suggests that the link between a country’s opportunity value index and its manufacturing performance varies by country income level. This is achieved by creating an interaction between the opportunity value index and a country income dummy variable.5.3.2 SpecificationThe following reduced form equation is estimated by using the random effects estimator:Mct=αc + β1Neoclassicalct + β2Africac + β3Productive structurect + μctWhere Mct is a measure of manufacturing performance in country c in year t. The natural logarithm of the count of manufacturing products exported was chosen as a measure for manufacturing performance because it is consistent with the product space framework, where growth is measured by increased colonisation of the various nodes that comprise the product space.9 Furthermore, it can be argued that the export of manufactured products is a better measure of the strength of a country’s manufacturing sector, as the ability to enter and compete in global markets indicates manufacturing proficiency.Neoclassicalct denotes the neoclassical variables controlling for factor endowments in country c in year t. In the estimations reported below, the following factor endowments are controlled for: capital per worker, total factor productivity and natural resource abundance.Productive structurect denotes measures taken from the Atlas of Economic Complexity (Hausmann et al., 2011), in which the productive capabilities of an economy are controlled for. In particular, the economic complexity and opportunity value indices were used. Africac is the dummy variable controlling for countries that are located in Africa.Finally, μct is the composite error term.