5.4 Estimating the determinants of Africa’s manufacturing performanceThis section analyses which factors may constrain the performance of the manufacturing sector in Africa within a multivariate context. To the extent that manufacturing sector growth is key to growth-enhancing structural transformation, then understanding the factors constraining growth in the sector is of prime importance. As described in Section 3, to analyse the factors that may constrain manufacturing performance in Africa, two broad specifications are examined, as discussed below.5.4.1 Explaining manufacturing performance: The neoclassical specificationThe estimates of the neoclassical specifications reported in table 5.1 make it possible to assess the extent to which endowments determine a country’s manufacturing performance. In each of the specifications, employment, capital stock, technology and natural resource abundance are controlled for. The random effects estimation technique is employed to run regressions on an unbalanced panel of cross-country data for the period 1995-2013.The positive and statistically significant coefficients for the log of capital per worker variable indicate that the more capital per worker in a country, the greater the number of manufactured products a country produces. This is expected, since manufacturing processes typically require relatively higher levels of capital per worker. This suggests that the extent to which financial capital markets restrict or enable firms to obtain access to credit market networks to finance physical capital investment may be an important constraint to manufacturing growth.The estimated coefficients of the measures controlling for technology and natural resource abundance are both positive but not statistically significant across both specifications. This suggests that these two factor endowments, which typically feature in production function equations, do not explain variation in manufacturing performance across countries over time.Interestingly, the dummy variable controlling for African countries is negative and statistically significant. This suggests that if there are two identical countries in terms of endowments and if one is African and the other is from another region, then the African country underperforms. It is likely that there are unobservable country characteristics that these specifications do not reveal. For example, there may be an ‘African effect’ with respect to foreign investor perceptions that results in less manufacturing-focused FDI inflows into African countries.
5.4.2 Explaining manufacturing performance: The Atlas variable specificationTable 5.2 reports the results for the specification where the Atlas variables are investigated to determine whether they explain manufacturing performance across a sample of countries over the period 1995-2013.10 These specifications extend the neoclassical specification by including the opportunity value and economic complexity measures. Column 2 shows this estimation, while column three extends the analysis by teasing out whether evidence of non-linearity exists in terms of how the opportunity value influences manufacturing performance across income levels.11 These specifications are estimated using the random effects estimator.Consistent with the neoclassical specification, the estimated coefficient for the capital stock per worker variable is positive and statistically significant. Again, this indicates the importance of a country’s endowment of physical capital in explaining its manufacturing performance.Contrary to the estimates in the neoclassical specification, the total factor productivity variable that controls for the technology level in a country is now statistically significant and positive. This result makes sense since the production process behind manufacturing requires certain technologies, and countries best able to acquire them are best placed to develop their manufacturing sector. Lall (2000) disaggregates manufactures into low- medium- and high-technology products, and argues that the economic success of the East Asian Tigers countries is partly explained by their ability to shift from low-technology manufactures to medium- and high-technology manufactures.Shifting focus to the economic complexity index variable, the estimated coefficient is negative and not statistically significant. This may be driven by the fact that countries with the highest levels of economic complexity tend to be high-income countries. Although they typically possess an advanced manufacturing sector, high-income countries tend to shift to the services sector as they develop, while the manufacturing sector plays an increasingly lesser role. In particular, there is evidence that the size of the manufacturing sector in high-income countries shrinks in the face of significant growth in manufacturing in emerging markets, particularly China (e.g., Fontagné, Gaulier and Zignago, 2008).
The results in table 5.2 show that the opportunity value index is positive and statistically significant, thus indicating that the more connected a country’s export structure, the better its manufacturing performance. This suggests that the productive capabilities of a country, embodied in its current export portfolio, are a key constraint to its manufacturing performance. The key notion behind this estimate is that countries whose productive capabilities are nearest to those needed to produce a greater range of manufactures are those with the best manufacturing performance.Interestingly, once the connectedness of a country’s export structure and its economic complexity are controlled for, the negative ‘Africa effect’ fades away.12 This implies that once the productive capabilities of a country and the potential they offer in terms of ability to shift to increased manufacturing activity are controlled for, the manufacturing sectors in African countries do not underperform relative to those in countries from other regions. Therefore, if African countries were able to develop the appropriate productive capabilities needed for a dynamic manufacturing sector, manufacturing firms in these countries would be able to compete in the global market.13From a policy standpoint, it is important to identify these productive capabilities. However, in light of the heterogeneity of African countries and the notion that Africa is not one big country, case study-type analyses would be the best approach to identify the specific constraints faced by manufacturing firms within individual African countries.Finally, the estimates reported in column three of table 5.2 attempt to tease out whether the link between the connectedness of countries’ export portfolios and their manufacturing performance is non-linear by income. The positive but not statistically significant coefficient for the variable that created an interaction between low-income country status and the opportunity value index suggests that connectedness of these countries does not affect their export performance. This may be because the manufacturing sectors in these countries are nearly non-existent.The estimated coefficients for the interaction terms pertaining to middle-income, high-income OECD and high-income non-OECD countries are, clearly, all positive and statistically significant. This suggests that the connectedness of the export structures of these countries is positively related to their manufacturing performance.Interestingly, it can be observed that the magnitude of the estimated coefficients increases as one moves from high-income OECD, to high-income non-OECD and to middle-income countries. The implication is that middle-income countries reap greater dividends in terms of improved manufacturing performance with respect to the connectedness of their export portfolios. Intuitively, this makes sense since middle-income countries with the requisite productive capabilities have greater scope to expand into new manufacturing products, and hence manufacturing growth (i.e., they start from a lower base and more ‘easy wins’). Conversely, high-income countries have established manufacturing sectors. Thus, the scope for expansion into new manufacturing activities is limited.
Furthermore, this result seems consistent with studies that examine the link between export diversification and economic development (Cadot, Carrère and Strauss-Kahn, 2011; Klinger and Lederman, 2011). Typically, these studies show that as countries develop, they diversify their export structures and produce more manufactured products. As countries reach higher levels of development, they shift to services and manufacturing growth levels off. In terms of the potential for manufacturing growth in African countries, this result offers solace since a small number of African countries have recently shifted to middle-income country status. These countries seem to show the most potential to grow their manufacturing sector.