5.5 Conclusions and policy recommendationsThe above has essentially presented a view that structural transformation principally involves the steady diversification over time of a domestic economy into increasingly sophisticated forms of manufacturing activities and output. Therefore, understanding the factors that may be constraining this steady growth in manufacturing production is of key importance.Using the analytical and empirical toolkit offered by the Atlas of Economic Complexity, it is shown that productive capabilities in Africa remain relatively low, which translates into low levels of economic development. The product space analysis shows that the export portfolios of African economies are peripheral, and thus dominated by primary products. The opportunity value index indicates that the peripheral nature of the African export portfolio has implications for the region’s ability to transform itself structurally. It is clear that the productive capabilities embodied in the productive structure of a typical African economy are far from the productive capabilities required to shift production toward more complex manufacturing activities.The econometric analysis suggests that factor endowments such as physical capital per worker impact positively on manufacturing performance. In contrast, it can be observed that being a country located in Africa has a negative effect on manufacturing performance and that this result is consistent across all specifications. The latter result suggests that even after controlling for a range of factors, there are unobservable variables that negatively affect Africa’s manufacturing performance. However, once a country’s economic complexity and the connectedness of its export structure are controlled for, the negative ‘Africa effect’ fades away.With respect to opportunity value, a non-linear effect can be observed. Specifically, it can be observed that the positive effect increases in magnitude as one moves from high-income to middle-income countries. This suggests that middle-income countries have the most to gain from investing in their productive capabilities. However, there is no statistically significant effect in the case of low-income countries. This may be because no manufacturing sector exists in these countries; thus, their current productive capabilities inherent in their productive structure are too far from what is needed to easily diversify into manufacturing.This analysis has shown that sustainable economic growth requires a country to diversify its export basket. Therefore, economic growth policies must focus on industries that produce relatively sophisticated products or ones that have the potential to produce more sophisticated products in the future (Zahler, et al., 2014). To identify such industries requires a detailed evaluation of the opportunities and challenges in each industry, undertaken without political interference or undue influence from vested interests (ibid.). Chile, for example, used the Boston Consulting Group, an external, neutral party, to identify high potential growth industries (ibid.). From there, the government must engage with the private sector to determine the most suitable public inputs – infrastructure (e.g. electricity), institutions (e.g. strong patent law) or education – to facilitate an increase in the productive capabilities of the sector and, thereby, the sophistication of the products produced.Ultimately, it is important to realize that there is no ‘magic bullet’ for Africa; rather, each country’s opportunities and challenges are more nuanced than presented in this study. It is likely that country-focused studies will yield more specific and desirable policy options.